In a “traditional” college classroom, the professor stands at the front of the hall and lectures — sometimes out of a textbook, sometimes off of notes, sometimes with PowerPoint slides. Students are supposed to come to class, sit, listen, and take notes, but there’s very little there to make students critically engaged in understanding the class materials.

To correct the deficiencies identified with this type of teaching — known as “direct instruction” — Harvard University physics professor Eric Mazur developed in the early 1990s a method called “peer instruction” that’s meant to actively engage students in what have typically been large, lecture-focused undergraduate classes.

Peer instruction is a form of “flipping the classroom,” you could say, where students spend time in class discussing rather than listening, and the professor makes sure to address specific questions and misunderstandings rather than just deliver a lecture.  During a class then, a professor asks conceptual questions (called “[ConcepTests](https://galileo.harvard.edu/login/)” by Mazur). Students are given a chance to respond individually, then talk about their answers in small groups. In these groups, students have to come to a consensus about “the right answer,” a process that requires students are able to articulate and argue about the concept — in other words, they have to spend some time thinking and understanding. Students are then quizzed again individually, and the professor in turn addresses any misconceptions that still exist. (Various technologies can be used to facilitate the quizzing part of this teaching method, including “clickers,” cell phones, and polling websites.)

Research has shown that peer instruction can be more effective than direct instruction. (See: [Mazur and Crouch](http://mazur.harvard.edu/publications.php?function=display&rowid=113); [Smith et al](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/323/5910/122.short)) This suggests that peer discussion boosts students’ understanding, even if none of the students in the small groups know the correct answer. Students appear to retain information longer learning this way as well. 

These findings have prompted Mazur and others to advocate for their colleagues to spend less time lecturing and more time engaging in peer instruction. It’s a shift to focus from teaching to learning, Mazur argues.

Despite the buzz about peer instruction and flipped classrooms, there’s still plenty of resistance to this — from both students and professors.  A recent article in [The Chronicle of Higher Education](http://chronicle.com/article/Physicists-Who-Flip-Their/134100/) contends that while physics professors (like Mazur) are quick to try new teaching methods, as many as a third revert to traditional lectures.

**Reference**:  [Eric Mazur, Peer Instruction: A User’s Manual](http://mazur.harvard.edu/education/pi_manual.php)
Eric Mazur, [Confessions of a Converted Lecturer](http://youtu.be/WwslBPj8GgI)