PLATO and the History of Teaching Software:

It’s difficult to point to a particular moment in history and say “this is the beginning of ed-tech.” Was it the slate? The printing press? The radio? Film? But if you had to pick a particular development in computer technology and education and give it some sort of historical primacy, it’d likely be PLATO (Programmed Logic for Automated Teaching Operations), credited as the first computer-assisted instructional system.

PLATO was developed at the University of Illinois in the 1960s as an early effort to automate teaching through technology. The first PLATO system operated on the local  ILLIAC I, a computer designed by the university, and only had one user. But subsequent versions quickly upped that number and the PLATO III could run up to 20 lessons simultaneously.

One of the keys to the design of the PLATO in all its incarnations was the display — one that notably contrasted with the teleprinters that served as the interface for most computers at the time. Indeed the PLATO system was known for the “[friendly orange glow](http://www.friendlyorangeglow.com/)” of the monitor, and while the graphics were pretty rudimentary, PLATO offered some basic animation and bitmapped-drawing options for its users. (Version IV even boasted an infrared touch screen.)

That display was meant to unlock learner engagement, and it also opened all sorts of possibilities for educational gaming. Moreover, networking of the PLATO systems created opportunities for multiplayer gaming as well. That graphical and networked component — along with messaging and communication tools that were part of the PLATO system — helped to foster one of the earlist online communities.  As [Brian Dear](http://www.friendlyorangeglow.com/), currently writing a history of PLATO’s influence on early cyberculture, describes it: 

>The birthplace of social computing: instant messaging, chat rooms, message forums, the world's first online newspaper, interactive fiction, emoticons, animations, virtual goods and virtual economies, a thriving developer community, MUDs (multi-user dungeons), personal publishing, screen savers, flat-panel plasma displays, one of the first spell-checking/answer-judging mechanisms, and countless other innovations. 

There is a very interesting tension here — in the story of PLATO and, as such, in the history of education technology — between a university’s plans to build an automated teaching system and its usage for socialization and social learning. It’s worth noting too that the original impetus for this automation came from the boom in university attendance following World War II and the belief that computers could be used to “scale” education — an impulse in ed-tech that is now over 50 years old.

As an educational software solution, PLATO ran into many problems (and not just that users wanted to use it to play early versions of online Dungeons and Dragons instead) — some associated with users’ lack of technical know-how and many associated with the high cost of the terminals and access to the courseware. The PLATO system was hardly a flop though — some 12,000 hours of course materials were created for hundreds of terminals worldwide. 

PLATO and its developers have had a lasting impact on ed-tech too. PLATO was used to create online testing and certification programs, in the 1970s, many of which were adopted by companies rather than academic institutions. Eventually the trademark was sold to a company (in 1989) that changed its name to PLATO Learning (in 2000) and continues to sell educational software. The University of Illinois continued its own work on instructional software as well, and some of that code ended up in Pearson products you can still find today.
